---
layout: post
title:  "Code Club"
date:   2017-06-19 
categories: programming, code club
---

I recently started volunteering at a local [Code Club](https://www.codeclub.org.uk/), which is an initiative to teach basic programming skills to 9-11 year olds. It provides a free service to connect volunteers, who help to run the club, with people who want to host one. Code Club also provides [projects](https://codeclubprojects.org/), they are easy to follow and are often fun little games. Code Club provides projects for teaching Scratch, Python, and HTML. These have been chosen because they are easy to pick up but at the same time allow quick feedback on the program.  

 Clubs are often held in schools, but can also be community centre, libraries, etc. The host provides the space, the computers, and advertises the club. As a volunteer, I arrive and help the children with the projects and with any problems they might run into. The focus is always to guide the children to being able to program on their own.

### Scratch

The club I volunteer at is teaching [Scratch](https://scratch.mit.edu/), a programming language designed with younger or beginner programmers in mind. The language is event-driven and (for the technically curious) it is implemented in ActionScript.

Where most programming languages are text-based (like Python or Java), Scratch provides a simple graphical interface where code blocks are clipped together to for the program. These code blocks represent variables, branches, loops, and so on. Because the blocks represent standard programming language features, the children learn to build programs in the same way as is needed with more mainstream text-based languages. 

The best part about the way the code block fit together is that they can only be combined in grammatically correct ways. For example, the condition an if block will only accept a boolean condition. This is particularly useful, given the well known problem with accidentally trying to put an assignment (often `a = 0`) instead of a comparison (often `a == 0`) in an if check. This means that the code blocks remove syntax errors and makes students focus on the behaviour of the program they've built.

The Scratch environment (seen in Fig. 1) has a stage, on which you can place sprites. The sprites and the stage itself can each have scripts, which is where you place the code blocks to build the program. The sprites react to changes in the program, which gives very quick feedback to changes (often with hilarious-looking results, if you're midway through making a change). 

I've found that Scratch is a very useful environment to program in, even given the simple interface. It's also really fun to use, especially with some of the games projects we've covered. I've enjoyed learning how to program in Scratch and then testing the boundaries of what I can make it do.

## Day in the Life

The club I volunteer at is run in a library, we've been working on [Scratch module 2](https://codeclubprojects.org/en-GB/scratch/#scratch-module-2). I usually turn up around 30 minutes early to help set up the computers -- log them in, open up a web browser and point it at the project we're working on -- and get myself ready. Once the children arrive, we introduce (or reintroduce) the project, usually showing the completed game to show them what they're working towards. I think this helps to put the steps in the project instruction into context. This is especially important at my club, because it runs every other week. 

The actual sessions usually goes fairly smoothly. I find that the project instructions are easy enough for the students to follow and Scratch is simple enough to get to grips with quickly, that the students can work their way through the programs easily. Occasionally the students have questions or they run into problems, and this is where I or the club host step in to help. At this point, its key to guide them towards the answers, rather than simple hand them the solution. Some techniques that I use are to ask them about parts of their program, ask them to describe to problem to me in simpler terms, or (my favourite) ask them to forget about what they _think_ they're written and literally read the program off the screen to me. This last technique often illustrates to the student where the problem is in their program. 

## Why Volunteer

I volunteer at a Code Club because it's helping to improve my teaching skills and because it's really fun. I've found that, aside from a little change in the way I talk to them, the way I teach these young students programming isn't very different to how I've taught undergraduate students programming. This is an interesting observation in itself, as well as being useful for me personally. I've found the club I volunteer at has been a good way of keeping up with how to teach programming and has given me the impetus to learn Scratch.

The old adage goes "never work with children or animals". I'm yet to work with animals, but working with children has gone surprisingly well so far. Granted, I only teach them for an hour at a time, but I've found it to be very enjoyable. I like seeing students, of all ages, going from having a problem understanding something, to solving that problem and knowing how to tackle similar problems n the future. I like seeing students becoming increasingly proficient in a skill. Also, some of the creative things that the students put into their programs are fantastic to see, especially when they decide to do something slightly different to what's in the project instructions.
